---
layout: post
title: 'gRPC'
date: "2019-01-08"
description: "gRPC"
category:
  - tech
  - featured
# tags will also be used as html meta keywords.
tags:
  - tech
  - rpc
show_meta: true
mathjax: true
gistembed: true
published: true
noindex: false
---

gRPC has become now the defacto standard for RPC.
What started out as a project (stubby) in Google has outgrown itself to a reliable way for RPC.
The below are some of details of why, how of gRPC.

Why not REST
----

* REST has been ruling the internet for more than a decade and taking on REST is like taking on TCP/IP.
* Why then would companies adopt and change from REST.
* Simple call to a server address on a browser works
  * Eg: www.test.com/somerestcall

Problems with REST
----

REST = HTTP + JSON


1. Vocabulary: Provides a very limited set.
	* GET       | Read
	* PUT     | Update/Replace 
	* PATCH   | Update/Modify
	* DELETE  | Delete

2. Not a machine readable format. 
    * Advantage:
		* Being textual and readable gives in a sure advantage of debugging. 
		* Tools for in inspection, modification, testing are readily available.

	* Disadvantages:	
		* With Machine readable API contracts, we can have machine generating code and not Humans writing the code.
		* With REST humans need to write the client APIs and for various languages.
		* Text based costs network bandwidth and is in-efficient.
3. Validations:
	* Field validations are a pain in REST.
5. Streaming is difficult.
6. Bidirectional streaming not possible
7. Operations are difficult to model. Eg: restart machine..


Features of gRPC 
--

1. HTTP2
   * Brings in truckload of advantages of HTTP2
   * Bidirectional streaming etc are listed below.
2. Vocabulary can be literally anything.
   * This means any functionality can be represented.
3. Selective Compression
   * Eg: For, images mixed with text, compression can be turned off.
4. Language Agnostic:
   Client APIs can be instantly generated and not written by humans.
   * Service declarations are written in Interface Description Language (IDL).
	 * This can generate language specific bindings.
	 
	 ==============| <-------------> gRPC Client (RUBY)
	 | gRPC SERVER |
	 |   (golang)  |
	 |=============| <-------------> gRPC Client (JAVA)

5. Field validations are very easy and can be specified right in the .proto file.
   * It is type-safe.
   * A string cannot be passed in while expecting an integer.
6. Cancellation and timeout contracts between client and server is possible.



     ==============|                           ==============| 
     | gRPC SERVER | <----ONE TCP SESSION---> | gRPC client  |
     |   (golang)  |                          |   (C++)      |
     |=============|                          |==============| 
           ||                                       ||
           || ..........HTTP Stream 1.............. ||
           ||                                       ||
           || ..........HTTP Stream 2.............. ||
           ||                                       ||
           || ..........HTTP Stream 3.............. ||


Payload
--
* Protobuf - PB.
* PB are packed and in binary which means it is network efficient.
* PB are 3 to 10 times smaller, and 20 to 100 times faster.

### Transport
* HTTP/2 vs HTTP 1.1


## HTTP1x/2

#### HTTP 1.1 Problems
* Request - Response model
* Head of line blocking which can be solved by pipelining.
* Latency sensitive , TCP handshake is required for every request.

### HTTP/2
* Based on Google's SPDY protocol
* Multiplexed streams, bidirectional interleaved streams on the same TCP conn.
#### Server Side streaming
* Server sends stream of responses on getting client request msg. After sending,
  it sends back server status and optional trailing metadata.
#### Client Side streaming
* Client sends stream of multiple requests to server. Server sends single response.
  typically but not necessarily after it has received all the client’s requests, 
  along with its status details and optional trailing metadata.


#### Bidirectional streaming

Conclusion
---

* If the intention is to get two systems talking to one another, efficiently, you must consider gRPC.


Credits:
* https://grpc.io/blog/http2_smarter_at_scale
* https://medium.com/@sankar.p/how-grpc-convinced-me-to-chose-it-over-rest-30408bf42794
